Isaiah was God’s prophet
for some 46 turbulent years.
It’s amazing what he saw.
The spiritual condition
of that nation was deplorable,
but Isaiah never gave up
in wanting to help his people.
It must have broken his heart
to see the ten-tribe kingdom of Israel
destroyed
by the Assyrians in 740 B.C.E.
But Isaiah said early in his career
—he said:
“Here I am! Send me!”
And he never turned his back
on that commission.
Did Isaiah’s words fall on deaf ears
when he wanted to help ones
to walk in Jehovah’s way?
‘This is the way.’
Well, obviously not.
There were some who responded,
though he might have thought
that his best years were behind him.
What about Hezekiah?
Hezekiah took those words seriously,
began to put his heart
into serving Jehovah God,
and had a great influence on the nation.
That was Hezekiah.
And it must have made
Isaiah’s heart rejoice
that his words were taken to heart
by some individuals like Hezekiah.
But there are others.
Let’s open our Bibles
to 2 Chronicles chapter 34
—2 Chronicles chapter 34—
and note others
who really put their heart
into serving Jehovah God to say:
“This is the way. Walk in it.”
Those words of Isaiah
would resonate in the ears of some.
For example in chapter 34,
Josiah was eight years old
when he became king.
He reigned for 31 years in Jerusalem.
Just a young boy Josiah was.
The year was 659 B.C.E.
And here in verse 2, it says:
‘He did what was right
in Jehovah’s eyes.
‘He walked in the ways of David.
He didn’t deviate
to the right or to the left.’
Where did Josiah get this zeal
to want to serve Jehovah
even at a young age?
It wouldn’t have been
from his father.
No.
His father, Amon, was wicked.
But perhaps his grandfather, Manasseh?
Manasseh died
when Josiah was six years old.
So you can imagine now
this repentant Manasseh
taking that little grandboy,
putting him on his knee,
and helping him
to understand about Jehovah God.
‘Don’t make the mistakes
that I’ve made.’
He must have loved his grandpa
—and at six years old.
Now he’s eight years old,
and he starts to serve Jehovah
with zeal appropriate for that age.
Now, it’s interesting
that when Josiah
was eight years old in 659 B.C.E.,
Nebuchadnezzar
was about five years old.
So Josiah becomes this king
full of compassion; he loved people.
Nebuchadnezzar
becomes a king of cruelty
and actually does damage
to the nation of Israel and, of course,
Josiah’s son Zedekiah,
who he ends up blinding.
Josiah
—so different from others.
Well, let’s look in verse 3.
In the eighth year
of his reign (that is Josiah),
he’s now 15 years old;
he’s still a boy.
He starts to search
for the true God.
And now
in the 12th year of his reign,
he’s even cleansing Judah.
He has a campaign against idolatry.
He’s 19 years old,
and he sweeps through with zeal
—at 19 years old.
‘This is the way. Walk in it.’
He’s going back to that theme
“This is the way.”
How happy and grateful
Josiah must have been
when someone else comes to Jerusalem
by the name of Jeremiah.
Jeremiah comes in
about 648-647 B.C.E.,
and they’re about the same age.
Josiah is 19;
Jeremiah is in his early 20’s.
What a team!
They become friends;
they love each other.
And what a duo as they
continue to help God’s people
to walk in the way!
Like a stereo system
—both of them.
Look in verse 31,
and just picture
what’s happening here in Jerusalem
with Josiah and with Jeremiah.
Verse 31
—there’s Josiah helping ones
to keep God’s commandments,
reading the Law that he found
from the book of the Law in their ears
—reading it,
helping them to walk in the way.
Verse 31 says
that Josiah ‘would follow Jehovah,
‘keep his commandments,
his reminders,
‘and his regulations
with all his heart,
with all his soul,
carry out those words.’
You can just sense
that Josiah’s feelings
were just bleeding
through these pages
—his love for Jehovah God
and wanting ones
to walk in the way of Jehovah.
So there you have Josiah;
you have Jeremiah.
It’s wonderful to see.
Now, as the years roll on,
would Josiah take note
of a young Judean boy
in the royal court
by the name of Daniel?
Daniel would have been young,
but perhaps he put his eye
on Daniel and said,
‘This boy
—he has a bright future in Jehovah’s service.’
We don’t know.
And Josiah wouldn’t live to see
Daniel’s accomplishments in due time.
But it’s still interesting.
‘This is the way. Walk in it.’
Individuals responded to that from Isaiah.
It did not fall on deaf ears.
How do we know?
Well, let’s go a little bit further.
Now the year is 617 B.C.E.,
and you have Daniel, Hananiah,
Mishael, Azariah, Ezekiel
—all individuals
who responded to Jehovah’s Word.
And when you think about
how they had to take
the words of Isaiah
and take the words of Jeremiah
—these boys—
and really apply it to their lives
and under their circumstances,
we’re very proud of them.
For example,
now Josiah is dead,
and his sons
and grandson begin to reign.
You have wicked kings.
And from the boyhood
of Daniel to his teens,
he witnessed their conduct
—bad conduct at the nation’s highest levels.
Jehoahaz: 23 years old, wicked;
Jehoiakim: 25 years old, wicked;
Jehoiachin: 18 years old, wicked;
and Zedekiah: 21 years old, wicked
—bad kings.
And these boys watching this?
Well, those are their names:
Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin, Zedekiah;
but they have nicknames:
Dumb, Dumber, Dumbest, and Stupid.
And yet Daniel
would not be influenced
by their bad conduct.
It’s amazing to imagine
what these boys were able to do
and how their faith remained intact.
They walked in Jehovah’s ways.
They resolved in their heart,
especially Daniel,
to be loyal to Jehovah God.
To what extent?
Ezekiel 14:14
—in Ezekiel 14:14
are these amazing words
where Ezekiel,
five years after Daniel
comes to Babylon,
writes these words.
So Daniel is now in his early 20’s;
Ezekiel is about 30 years old.
Like Daniel’s older brother,
you can imagine how proud
Ezekiel would have been
to write these words about Daniel
—no jealousy.
‘I love that boy.
He’s like my little brother.’
And he says:
‘If Noah and Daniel and Job were here,
‘you see, they would save themselves
because of their righteous conduct.’
Daniel was amazing
—to be sandwiched
between Job and Noah
at such a young age.
And that’s the type of man
we’re talking about.
Why do we bring it up?
We bring it up
because we have many
Daniel-like brothers and sisters
right in our Bethel family here.
Young brothers and sisters
who have determined in their hearts
to prove the Devil a liar,
to take advantage of their youth,
to show Jehovah
how loyal they want to be
—the depth of their devotion.
And we want to commend
these young brothers and sisters
—Daniel-like ones.
We cannot legislate
love of God for you;
we cannot legislate
how you use
your electronic devices;
we cannot legislate
what you watch
on television and movies.
We cannot do that.
We cannot tell you
to put a firewall up for your computer.
You can get around all that.
You’re smart.
Your “firewall” is your love
for Jehovah God
—your depth
of devotion for him.
And that’s what we’re saying:
“Thank you for using
“your free will like Daniel
to honor Jehovah God.
Keep it up.”
And what about our older ones?
Daniel continued to serve Jehovah
up until about 100 years old.
He never gave up.
What helped him?
His prayers to Jehovah God.
Prayer was the bedrock of his faith.
So older Daniel-like members
of our family
that have served Jehovah
for decades,
your loyalty
is so deeply appreciated.
And it’s your prayers
that have caused you
—day in and day out,
week in and week out,
month in and month out
—to continue to serve Jehovah.
And just as Daniel and Isaiah
and Jeremiah and Josiah
had a positive impact
on the people of their day,
let me reassure you
—you older brothers
and sisters, you mature ones—
your loyalty and determination
to walk in Jehovah’s way for decades
has deeply influenced our Bethel family.
Your determination
never to betray your God
has touched us personally,
and for this we say, “Thank you.”